---
layout: post
title: "The REPL: Issue 105 - May 2023"
date: 2023-06-06 11:20:41 -0700
categories:
- the repl
- rails
- active_record
- arel
- statistics
- good_job
excerpt_separator: <!-- more -->
---

### [The Statistics Handbook][stats]

I've been taking a statistics course in Coursera. The lectures and exercises are great, but I was really missing a text book that I can come back and reference. I was happy to find this gem: Free and available to download.

### [The definitive guide to Arel, the SQL manager for Ruby][arel]

Recently, I've been doing more complicated SQL queries in Rails, for which the `ActiveRecord` API is not enough. Enter `Arel`, a relational algebra library on which `ActiveRecord` is built, that allows more flexibility when using Rails. This is a great guide to using it. `Arel` is considered a private API in Rails. I've found it to be very stable, but be mindful when using it.

### [Introducing Tobox][tobox]

This gem attempts to solve the write-to-multiple-databases problem when using background processing libraries in Ruby (e.g sidekiq). In effect, this is an event system, but without describing it heavily as such. The problem, stated more concisely is well described in [Pattern: Transactional Outbox][outbox]. The gem is new. I can't comment on it's maturity or stability. The author is right in pointing out that Rail's ActiveJob DSL allows easy backgrounding of jobs, but ignores transactionality and dual-write problem that might exist. In fact, I was talking about this with some co-workers recently. One of the benefits of using [GoodJob][gj] is that since the queue storage is in the same database, we can ignore this problem, as long as we are using a transaction.

[stats]: https://github.com/carloocchiena/the_statistics_handbook
[arel]: https://jpospisil.com/2014/06/16/the-definitive-guide-to-arel-the-sql-manager-for-ruby.html
[tobox]: https://honeyryderchuck.gitlab.io/2023/04/29/introducing-tobox.htmls
[outbox]: https://microservices.io/patterns/data/transactional-outbox.html
[gj]: https://github.com/bensheldon/good_job
